DRAFT: WSL-Ubuntu-Android Build Guide (#366)
bitcoin-core/gui-qml: doc/build-android.md

## Building and packaging

> After the depends are built configure with one of the resulting prefixes and run `make && make apk` in `src/qt`.

Author: Great suggestion on the `configure` examples will add them...

RE: the grabble issue, I believe the key here is NOT to run `make` in the base directory but run it only in the `src/qt`, could you confirm if that works?

> After the depends are built configure with one of the resulting prefixes and run `make && make apk` in `src/qt`.

Reviewer: If I run `make` in `src/qt` I got this error:

```
  CXXLD    qt/bitcoin-qt
make[1]: *** No rule to make target 'test_bitcoin_qt'.  Stop.
make[1]: Leaving directory '/home/ubunpolk/src/bitcoin-core-gui-qml/src'
make: *** [Makefile:3: all] Error 2
```

That's why I run `make` in the base bitcoin directory, which works fine. Perhaps there's something wrong with my setup.
I'll try to do the Android build on a non-WSL Ubuntu and will let you know.

> After the depends are built configure with one of the resulting prefixes and run `make && make apk` in `src/qt`.

Reviewer: Both issues, `make` running under `src/qt` not working having to run it under bitcoin base project directory and `gradle` not working when running `make apk` having to touch `src/Makefile`, also happened when I followed and tested this guide on Ubuntu 22.04 (non-WSL).

    ```

4. Run Android Studio:

    ```bash
    android-studio
    ```

You can also follow the full installation guide for Android Studio and Android NDK [here](https://linuxhint.com/install-android-studio-ubuntu22-04/).

### Step 4: Install Android NDK

To install Android NDK:

1. With a project open in Android Studio, click `Tools > SDK Manager`.
2. Click the `SDK Tools` tab.
3. Select the `NDK (Side by side)` and `CMake` checkboxes.
4. Click `OK`.
5. A dialog box will tell you how much space the NDK package consumes on disk.
6. Click `OK`.
7. When the installation is complete, click `Finish`.

You can find the full guide [here](https://developer.android.com/studio/projects/install-ndk).

### Step 5: Check Android Device Architecture

Before you proceed, ensure you check your Android Device's hardware architecture. Use usbip and adb for this. Detailed guide can be found [here](https://www.xda-developers.com/wsl-connect-usb-devices-windows-11/).

1. Connect your Android device to your PC and enable USB debugging in Developer Options.
2. Once usbip is installed, list all USB devices connected to your PC by running the following command as Administrator in `cmd`:

    ```bash

>     usbipd wsl list

Author: Updating with proper command usbipd list

    ```

> 3. Note down the `BUSID` of the device you want to connect to WSL. Then run the following command, replacing `<busid>` with the `BUSID` of your device:

Reviewer: Devices have to explicitly be exported using `usbip bind` before `usbipd` makes them available to other hosts.
So, before you run the `attach`command you need to bind the device: `usbipd bind -b <busid>`.

Author: good catch... it seems on my device the setting was already `SHARED`, however I'll add the `bind` suggestion in case the android device doesn't attach properly

    ```bash

>     usbipd wsl attach --busid <busid>

Author: yep will update

    ```

2. Extract the file:

    ```bash
    sudo unzip -d /opt/gradle /tmp/gradle-${VERSION}-bin.zip
    ```

3. Set environment variables:

    ```bash
    sudo nano /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

4. Add the following lines to the file:

    ```bash
    export GRADLE_HOME=/opt/gradle/gradle-${VERSION}
    export PATH=${GRADLE_HOME}/bin:${PATH}
    ```

5. Change the permissions:

    ```bash
    sudo chmod +x /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

6. Load the environment variables:

    ```bash
    source /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

7. Verify the installation by checking the Gradle version:

    ```bash
    gradle -v
    ```

You can follow the full guide to install Gradle [here](https://linuxhint.com/installing_gradle_ubuntu/).

### Step 7: Build APKs

Before building the APKs, run the following commands:

```bash
PATH=$(echo "$PATH" | sed -e 's/:\/mnt.*//g') # strip out problematic Windows %PATH% imported var
sudo bash -c "echo 0 > /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status" # Disable WSL support for Win32 applications.
```

More details on this step can be found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/build-windows.md#compiling-with-windows-subsystem-for-linux).

> 

Author: At the top of this document the example given is:
    ANDROID_SDK=/home/user/Android/Sdk ANDROID_NDK=/home/user/Android/Sdk/ndk-bundle make HOST=aarch64-linux-android ANDROID_API_LEVEL=28 ANDROID_TOOLCHAIN_BIN=/home/user/Android/Sdk/ndk-bundle/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/linux-x86_64/bin

    in your example, what do the `CC=...` and `CXX=...` add in terms building the proper depends?

> 

Reviewer: I think it forces to build `depends` with the proper clang version for the required API Level.

> 

Author: ah got it... ok so will leave the the extra `CC=` and `CXX=` from example to minimize confusion, however if you feel strongly about having them let me know?

> 

Reviewer: I prefer to use them in all `make` calls to ensure the Android API Level for the particular architecture (arm64-v8a, armeabi-v7a, etc), but perhaps it's not required or I'm over-using them, maybe @hebasto can shed some light here.

    ```

2. Extract the file:

    ```bash
    sudo unzip -d /opt/gradle /tmp/gradle-${VERSION}-bin.zip
    ```

3. Set environment variables:

    ```bash
    sudo nano /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

4. Add the following lines to the file:

    ```bash
    export GRADLE_HOME=/opt/gradle/gradle-${VERSION}
    export PATH=${GRADLE_HOME}/bin:${PATH}
    ```

5. Change the permissions:

    ```bash
    sudo chmod +x /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

6. Load the environment variables:

    ```bash
    source /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

7. Verify the installation by checking the Gradle version:

    ```bash
    gradle -v
    ```

You can follow the full guide to install Gradle [here](https://linuxhint.com/installing_gradle_ubuntu/).

### Step 7: Build APKs

Before building the APKs, run the following commands:

```bash
PATH=$(echo "$PATH" | sed -e 's/:\/mnt.*//g') # strip out problematic Windows %PATH% imported var
sudo bash -c "echo 0 > /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status" # Disable WSL support for Win32 applications.
```

More details on this step can be found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/build-windows.md#compiling-with-windows-subsystem-for-linux).

> Now, you can build the APKs using the guide found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui-qml/blob/main/doc/build-android.md).

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
Now, you need to build the dependencies for the specific Android API Level, for which you can follow the guide found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui-qml/blob/main/doc/build-android.md).
```

Maybe that guide above needs to be updated as it shows an example for "a default build with no disabled dependencies", and could display the `make -C depends` suggested previously. And later below you also specify run `make && make apk` from `src/qt` as on the build-android guide.

In my opinion, I'd be more clear on the sub-steps here in Step 7 in order to build the APK and transfer/ install it to the device (including for each the other commands to make it work as the `qlogging.cpp` update, paths, etc):
1. build dependencies
2. configure with proper host
3. make
4. make apk
5. adb install

Author: Great idea on the having sub-steps

    ```bash
    sudo unzip -d /opt/gradle /tmp/gradle-${VERSION}-bin.zip
    ```

3. Set environment variables:

    ```bash
    sudo nano /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

4. Add the following lines to the file:

    ```bash
    export GRADLE_HOME=/opt/gradle/gradle-${VERSION}
    export PATH=${GRADLE_HOME}/bin:${PATH}
    ```

5. Change the permissions:

    ```bash
    sudo chmod +x /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

6. Load the environment variables:

    ```bash
    source /etc/profile.d/gradle.sh
    ```

7. Verify the installation by checking the Gradle version:

    ```bash
    gradle -v
    ```

You can follow the full guide to install Gradle [here](https://linuxhint.com/installing_gradle_ubuntu/).

### Step 7: Build APKs

0. Before building the APKs, run the following commands:

    ```bash
    PATH=$(echo "$PATH" | sed -e 's/:\/mnt.*//g') # strip out problematic Windows %PATH% imported var
    sudo bash -c "echo 0 > /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status" # Disable WSL support for Win32 applications.
    ```

    More details on this step can be found [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/build-windows.md#compiling-with-windows-subsystem-for-linux).

> 1. Now, you need to build the dependencies for the specific Android API Level, for which you can follow the guide found at the top of this doc [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui-qml/blob/main/doc/build-android.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Now, you need to build the [dependencies](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/depends/README.md) for the specific Android API Level and architecture of your Android device (as you discovered in #Step 5 - point 6), for which you can follow the guide found at the top of this doc [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui-qml/blob/main/doc/build-android.md).
```
